<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Dramatis Personae</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="dramatis-personae" epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dramatis Personae</h2>
			<ul>
				<li>
					<p>ANTON ANTONOVICH SKVOZNIK-DMUKHANOVSKY, the Governor.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>ANNA ANDREYEVNA, his wife.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>MARYA ANTONOVNA, his daughter.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>LUKA LUKICH KHLOPOV, the Inspector of Schools.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>His Wife.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>AMMOS FIODOROVICH LIAPKIN-TIAPKIN, the Judge.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>ARTEMY FILIPPOVICH ZEMLIANIKA, the Superintendent of Charities.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>IVAN KUZMICH SHPEKIN, the Postmaster.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>PIOTR IVANOVICH DOBCHINSKY.</p>
					<p>PIOTR IVANOVICH BOBCHINSKY.</p>
					<p>Country Squires.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>IVAN ALEKSANDROVICH KHLESTAKOV, an official from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">St.</abbr> Petersburg.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>OSIP, his servant.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>CHRISTIAN IVANOVICH HÜBNER, the district Doctor.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>FIODR ANDREYEVICH LULIUKOV.</p>
					<p>IVAN LAZAREVICH RASTAKOVSKY.</p>
					<p>STEPAN IVANOVICH KOROBKIN.</p>
					<p>ex-officials, esteemed personages of the town.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>STEPAN ILYICH UKHOVERTOV, the Police Captain.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>SVISTUNOV.</p>
					<p>PUGOVITZYN.</p>
					<p>DERZHIMORDA.</p>
					<p>Police Sergeants.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>ABDULIN, a Merchant.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>FEVRONYA PETROVA POSHLIOPKINA, the Locksmith’s wife.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>The Widow of a non-commissioned Officer.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>MISHKA, the Governor’s Servant.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Servant at the Inn.</p>
				</li>
				<li>
					<p>Guests, Merchants, Citizens, and Petitioners.</p>
				</li>
			</ul>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
